- Learning your first programming language is exciting,
but a little overwhelming.
It requires a lot of thought and experimentation
to understand the new programming concepts you'll encounter.
And at the same time,
you'll be getting familiar with the specific roles
for the language you're learning.
It's not a perfect comparison,
but it's very similar to when you first learned
to read and write.
You had to learn the alphabet
and the different sounds each letter made.
Then you could begin to put those letters together
to create words which each had their own meaning.
From there, you learned to build sentences,
combine different words together,
along with some punctuation and grammar rules
to express things like statements or questions.
Eventually, you advanced to writing
full paragraphs and papers that organized many sentences
to communicate multiple thoughts
about a particular topic.
At each step, you learned a new building block
or feature of the English language,
which allowed you to read and write larger,
more complicated pieces of text.
When you learn to code with programming languages,
like JavaScript, Python, or Java,
you'll go through a similar learning progression.
That's because most programming languages
are made up of similar building blocks
and as you learn them, you'll be able to write
more advanced pieces of code.
Variables and data types are one of those building blocks.
It's where most developers start
when learning a new language,
because they're sort of like the letters in the alphabet.
Programmers use variables to store information,
like a piece of text or a number.
Each variable has a name and a data type,
which is how we know the type of information that it stores.
Along with text and numbers,
most programming languages will include data types
for other information, like dates,
and different types of numbers and groups of values
known as arrays.
At this point, you'll also be introduced to operators,
which are special symbols in the language
that allow programmers to perform
different actions on variables.
You can can use these operators
to assign a value to a variable,
to compare two variables,
or to perform arithmetic operations,
like addition or subtraction.
When learning these concepts,
you'll arrange variables and other operators
to form statements, which are kind of like sentences
that tell the computer what to do.
Each language will have specific rules
for how the statements are structured.
This is known as its syntax.
A language's syntax includes special characters,
like curly braces or semicolons,
that form your code's structure.
You can almost think of it like punctuation in a sentence.
Syntax is what allows the code to be understood
by either a compiler or an interpreter.
These are special components
built into programming languages that help run your code.
Learning how to write correct syntax is very important,
because a missing parenthesis or semicolon
will cause these components to throw errors
when you attempt to compile or run the code.
In some cases, our code needs to change how it will execute.
It's often not as simple as just
running a bunch of statements one right after the other
the same way every time.
For situations where you need to change
the flow of the code, you'll use what's known
as a control structure.
Programming languages will include
several types of control structures
and which one you choose will depend
upon what you need to achieve.
For example, if we need to ask a question in the code
and then decide whether to execute
one piece of code or another, depending upon the answer,
we can use an if statement to make the decision.
In other cases, you might need to run the same statement
several times repeatedly.
To do this, we use a control structure known as a loop.
When running a loop, we normally have some sort of condition
that tells the code when to stop iterating
or repeating the statements.
If you have a piece of code that you're using frequently,
you can place it inside of a function.
A function group statements together
so that you can reuse them throughout your code
without repeating them all over the place.
Once you place a block of code inside of a function,
other code can then just call the function
when it needs to execute the same set of instructions.
When we call a function,
we can provide it with some information
about what it needs to complete its work.
These are known as arguments.
If the function needs to return some information
after it's executed its statements,
it can return a value to the code that called it.
These are known as the return value.
These are the basics you'll want to focus on
when learning your first programming language.
After you learn them, it will become easier
to learn your next language,
because these same building blocks
are found across all programming languages,
although the syntax or the way they're written
may vary a bit.
Unfortunately, most of these will not apply
to CSS and HTML,
because they're different types of languages.
I know, it's a lot to take in all at once.
It's going to take time and require a bit of patience,
just like when you first learn to read and write.
But before you know it,
you'll master these different concepts
and will be writing your own application with ease.